Update middleware docs (#1010)
solidjs/solid-docs: src/routes/solid-start/advanced/middleware.mdx

title: "Middleware"
---

> Middleware is a function that intercepts HTTP requests and responses. It allows you to modify the response by rewriting, redirecting, modifying the request or response headers, or responding directly.

Reviewer: > It allows you to modify the response by rewriting, redirecting, modifying the request or response headers, or responding directly.

Feels a little too wordy, maybe split it into multiple sentences or a bullet list, or simplify the list to only mention the broad categories of things, like

> It allows you to modify the request or response objects in various ways.

	event.request.headers.set("x-custom-header1", "hello-from-middleware1");
}

function middleware2(event: FetchEvent) {
	event.request.headers.set("x-custom-header2", "hello-from-middleware2");
}

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: [middleware1, middleware2],
});
```

## Redirects

Solid-Router provides a `redirect` helper that can be used to redirect the user to a different URL within a middleware.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
import { redirect } from "@solidjs/router";

const REDIRECT_MAP: Record<string, string> = {
	"/signup": "/auth/signup",
	"/login": "/auth/login",
};

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		const { pathname } = new URL(event.request.url);

		if (pathname in REDIRECT_MAP) {
			return redirect(REDIRECT_MAP[pathname], 301);
		}
	},
});
```

## Common Pitfalls

### Authentication and Authorization

Although using middleware for authentication and authorization is a common practice in many web frameworks, it is not advisable to use SolidStart middleware for these purposes.

This is because SolidStart middleware is not guaranteed to run on every single request.

> For optimal security, all checks should be performed as close to your data source as possible.

Reviewer: You can actually add a section on Authentication that shows how to do token validation in a middleware, and reword this to something like this

> Using middleware for protecting routes is not recommended in SolidStart. Authorization should be handled as close as possible to the data source.

Technically authentication is completely fine (and recommended) in the middleware, authorization is the thing that should be close to the data and not in the middleware.

title: "Middleware"
---

Middleware intercepts HTTP requests and responses to perform tasks like authentication, redirection, logging, and more.
It also enables sharing request-scoped data across the application using the `event.locals` object.

## Common use cases

Here are some common use cases for middleware:

> - **Request and response header management:** Middleware enables adding, modifying, or removing headers to control caching (e.g., setting `Cache-Control` headers), enhance security (e.g., setting security headers like `Content-Security-Policy`), or implement custom behavior based on request characteristics.

Reviewer 2: This reads a bit too long. I suggest it's changed to this:

```suggestion
- **Request and response header management:** Middleware allows modifying headers to control caching (e.g., `Cache-Control`), improve security (e.g., `Content-Security-Policy`), or implement custom behaviour based on request characteristics.
```

- **Global data sharing:** The `event.locals` object allows storing and sharing request-scoped data between middleware and any server-side context (e.g., API routes, server-only queries/actions). This is useful for passing information like user authentication status, feature flags, or other request-related data.

> - **Server-side redirects:** Middleware can redirect users based on various request properties, such as locale (e.g., redirecting users to a localized version of the site), authentication state (e.g., redirecting unauthenticated users to a login page), or custom query parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Server-side redirects:** Middleware can redirect users based on various request properties, such as locale, authentication state, or custom query parameters.
```

> - **Request preprocessing:** Middleware can perform lightweight preprocessing tasks, such as validating tokens (e.g., JWT validation) or normalizing paths (e.g., removing trailing slashes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Request preprocessing:** Middleware can perform lightweight preprocessing tasks, such as validating tokens or normalizing paths.
```

## Limitations

While middleware is powerful, certain tasks are better handled in other parts of your application for performance, maintainability, or security reasons:

- **Authorization:** Middleware does _not_ run on every request, especially during client-side navigations.

>   Relying on middleware for authorization would create a significant security vulnerability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Relying on it for authorization would create a significant security vulnerability.
```

  As a result, authorization checks should be performed as close to the data source as possible.
  This means it within API routes, server-only queries/actions, or other server-side utilities.
- **Heavy computation or long-running processes:** Middleware should be lightweight and execute quickly to avoid impacting performance.

>   CPU-intensive tasks, long-running processes, or blocking operations (like complex calculations or external API calls) are best handled by dedicated route handlers, server-side utilities, or background jobs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  CPU-intensive tasks, long-running processes, or blocking operations (e.g., complex calculations, external API calls) are best handled by dedicated route handlers, server-side utilities, or background jobs.
```

		greeting: event?.locals?.sayHello(),
	};
}, "user");

export default function Page() {
	const user = createAsync(() => getUser());

	return (
		<div>
			<p>Name: {user()?.name}</p>
			<button onClick={() => alert(user()?.greeting)}>Say Hello</button>
		</div>
	);
}
```

## Headers

Request and response headers can be accessed and modified using the `event.request.headers` and `event.response.headers` objects.
These follow the [standard Web API `Headers`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers) interface, exposing built-in methods for reading/updating headers.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		// Reading client metadata for later use
		const userAgent = event.request.headers.get("user-agent");
		// Adding custom headers to request/response
		event.request.headers.set("x-custom-request-header", "hello");
		event.response.headers.set("x-custom-response-header1", "hello");
	},
	onBeforeResponse: (event) => {
		// Finalizing response headers before sending to client
		event.response.headers.set("x-custom-response-header2", "hello");
	},
});
```

> <Callout type="info" title="Note">
> 
> Headers set in `onRequest` are applied **before** the route handler processes the request, allowing downstream middleware or route handlers to override them.
> Headers set in `onBeforeResponse` are applied **after** the route handler and are finalized for the client.
> 
> </Callout>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Headers set in `onRequest` are applied **before** the route handler processes the request, allowing downstream middleware or route handlers to override them.
Headers set in `onBeforeResponse` are applied **after** the route handler and are finalized for the client.
```

While these headers can be manipulated directly, [Vinxi](https://vinxi.vercel.app), the underlying server toolkit powering SolidStart, provides helpers to simplify cookie management.
See the [Vinxi Cookies documentation](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/cookies.html) for more information.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
import { getCookie, setCookie } from "vinxi/http";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		// Reading a cookie
		const theme = getCookie(event.nativeEvent, "theme");

		// Setting a secure session cookie with expiration
		setCookie(event.nativeEvent, "session", "abc123", {
			httpOnly: true,
			secure: true,
			maxAge: 60 * 60 * 24, // 1 day
		});
	},
});
```

## Custom responses

Returning a value from a middleware function immediately terminates the request processing pipeline and sends the returned value as the response to the client.
This means no further middleware functions or route handlers will be executed.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: () => {
		return new Response("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
	},
});
```

> <Callout type="info" title="Note">
> 
> Only [`Response`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) objects can be returned from middleware functions.
> Returning any other value will result in an error.
> 
> </Callout>

Reviewer 2: Similar to the comment i added at the bottom, this is related to the example / section this is in so we can remove the callout.

```suggestion
Only [`Response`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) objects can be returned from middleware functions.
Returning any other value will result in an error.
```

### Redirects

> [Solid Router](/solid-router) provides the [`redirect`](/solid-router/reference/response-helpers/redirect) helper function which simplifies creating redirect responses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Solid Router](/solid-router) provides the [`redirect` helper function](/solid-router/reference/response-helpers/redirect) which simplifies creating redirect responses.
```

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
import { redirect } from "@solidjs/router";

const REDIRECT_MAP: Record<string, string> = {
	"/signup": "/auth/signup",
	"/login": "/auth/login",
};

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		const { pathname } = new URL(event.request.url);

		// Redirecting legacy routes permanently to new paths
		if (pathname in REDIRECT_MAP) {
			return redirect(REDIRECT_MAP[pathname], 301);
		}
	},
});
```

This example checks the requested path and returns a redirect response if it matches a predefined path.
The 301 status code indicates a permanent redirect.
Other redirect status codes (e.g., 302, 307) are available as needed.

### JSON responses

> Solid Router provides the [`json`](/solid-router/reference/response-helpers/json) helper function which simplifies sending custom JSON responses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Solid Router provides the [`json` helper function](/solid-router/reference/response-helpers/json) which simplifies sending custom JSON responses.
```

import { json } from "@solidjs/router";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		// Rejecting unauthorized API requests with a JSON error
		const authHeader = event.request.headers.get("Authorization");
		if (!authHeader) {
			return json({ error: "Unauthorized" }, { status: 401 });
		}
	},
});
```

## Chaining middleware functions

`onRequest` and `onBeforeResponse` options in `createMiddleware` can accept either a single function or an array of middleware functions.
When an array is provided, these functions execute sequentially within the same lifecycle event.
This enables composing smaller, more-focused middleware functions, rather than handling all logic in a single, large middleware function.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
import { type FetchEvent } from "@solidjs/start/server";

function middleware1(event: FetchEvent) {
	event.request.headers.set("x-custom-header1", "hello-from-middleware1");
}

function middleware2(event: FetchEvent) {
	event.request.headers.set("x-custom-header2", "hello-from-middleware2");
}

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: [middleware1, middleware2],
});
```

> <Callout type="tip" title="Middleware execution order">
>  
> The order of middleware functions in the array determines their execution order.
> Dependent middleware functions should be placed after the middleware functions they rely on.
> For example, authentication middleware should typically run before logging middleware.
> 
> </Callout>

Reviewer 2: Callouts should be used sparingly - since this is following an example and it's directly related to what is talked about above, the callout can be removed.

```suggestion
The order of middleware functions in the array determines their execution order.
Dependent middleware functions should be placed after the middleware functions they rely on.
For example, authentication middleware should typically run before logging middleware.
```

## Common use cases

Here are some common use cases for middleware:

- **Request and response header management:** Middleware enables adding, modifying, or removing headers to control caching (e.g., setting `Cache-Control` headers), enhance security (e.g., setting security headers like `Content-Security-Policy`), or implement custom behavior based on request characteristics.
- **Global data sharing:** The `event.locals` object allows storing and sharing request-scoped data between middleware and any server-side context (e.g., API routes, server-only queries/actions). This is useful for passing information like user authentication status, feature flags, or other request-related data.
- **Server-side redirects:** Middleware can redirect users based on various request properties, such as locale (e.g., redirecting users to a localized version of the site), authentication state (e.g., redirecting unauthenticated users to a login page), or custom query parameters.
- **Request preprocessing:** Middleware can perform lightweight preprocessing tasks, such as validating tokens (e.g., JWT validation) or normalizing paths (e.g., removing trailing slashes).

## Limitations

> While middleware is powerful, it's essential to understand its limitations.
> Certain tasks are better handled in other parts of your application for performance, maintainability, or security reasons:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While middleware is powerful, certain tasks are better handled in other parts of your application for performance, maintainability, or security reasons:
```

- **Authorization:** Middleware does _not_ run on every request, especially during client-side navigations.
  Relying on middleware for authorization would create a significant security vulnerability.

>   Authorization checks should be performed within API routes, server-only queries/actions, or other server-side utilities, as close to the data source as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  As a result, authorization checks should be performed as close to the data source as possible.
 This means it within API routes, server-only queries/actions, or other server-side utilities.
```

> - **Heavy computation or long-running processes:** Middleware should be lightweight and execute quickly to avoid impacting performance.
>   CPU-intensive tasks, long-running processes, or blocking operations (like complex calculations or external API calls) should be handled by dedicated route handlers, server-side utilities, or background jobs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Heavy computation or long-running processes:** Middleware should be lightweight and execute quickly to avoid impacting performance.
  CPU-intensive tasks, long-running processes, or blocking operations (like complex calculations or external API calls) are best handled by dedicated route handlers, server-side utilities, or background jobs.
```

> - **Database operations:** Performing direct database queries within middleware can lead to performance bottlenecks and make your application harder to maintain.
>   Database interactions should be handled by server-side utilities or route handlers.
>   This approach allows for better management of database connections and handling of potential errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Database operations:** Performing direct database queries within middleware can lead to performance bottlenecks and make your application harder to maintain.
  Database interactions should be handled by server-side utilities or route handlers, which will create better management of database connections and handling of potential errors.
```

export default defineConfig({
	middleware: "src/middleware/index.ts",
});
```

## Lifecycle events

A middleware function executes at specific points in the request lifecycle, using two key events: `onRequest` and `onBeforeResponse`.

### `onRequest`

The `onRequest` event is triggered at the beginning of the request lifecycle, before the request is handled by the route handler.
This is the ideal place to:

- Store request-scoped data in `event.locals` for use in later middleware functions or route handlers.
- Set or modify request headers.
- Perform early redirects.

### `onBeforeResponse`

The `onBeforeResponse` event is triggered after a request has been processed by the route handler but before the response is sent to the client.
This is the ideal place to:

- Set or modify response headers.
- Log response metrics or perform other post-processing tasks.
- Modify the response body.

## Locals

In web applications, there's often a need to share request-specific data across different parts of the server-side code.
This data might include user authentication status, trace IDs for debugging, or client metadata (e.g., user agent, geolocation).

> The `event.locals` object provides a temporary, request-scoped storage layer to address this need.
> Data stored within it is only available during the processing of a single HTTP request and is automatically cleared afterward.
> `event.locals` is a plain JavaScript object and can hold any JavaScript value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `event.locals` is a plain JavaScript object that can hold any JavaScript value.
This object provides a temporary, request-scoped storage layer to address this need.
Any data stored within it is only available during the processing of a single HTTP request and is automatically cleared afterward.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		event.locals.user = {
			name: "John Wick",
		};
		event.locals.sayHello = () => {
			return "Hello, " + event.locals.user.name;
		};
	},
});
```
```

> Within middleware, `event.locals` can be accessed and modified directly.
> Other server-side contexts must use the [`getRequestEvent`](/reference/server-utilities/get-request-event) function to access the `event.locals` object.
> 
> This example demonstrates storing user information in `event.locals`:
> 
> ```ts
> import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
> 
> export default createMiddleware({
> 	onRequest: (event) => {
> 		event.locals.user = {
> 			name: "John Wick",
> 		};
> 		event.locals.sayHello = () => {
> 			return "Hello, " + event.locals.user.name;
> 		};
> 	},
> });
> ```
> 
> This example demonstrates accessing `event.locals` within a server-only action using `getRequestEvent`:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within middleware, `event.locals` can be accessed and modified directly.
Other server-side contexts must use the [`getRequestEvent`](/reference/server-utilities/get-request-event) function to access the `event.locals` object.
```

```tsx title="src/routes/index.tsx"
import { getRequestEvent } from "solid-js/web";
import { query, createAsync } from "@solidjs/router";

const getUser = query(async () => {
	"use server";
	const event = getRequestEvent();
	return {
		name: event?.locals?.user?.name,
		greeting: event?.locals?.sayHello(),
	};
}, "user");

export default function Page() {
	const user = createAsync(() => getUser());

	return (
		<div>
			<p>Name: {user()?.name}</p>
			<button onClick={() => alert(user()?.greeting)}>Say Hello</button>
		</div>
	);
}
```

## Headers

Request and response headers can be accessed and modified using the `event.request.headers` and `event.response.headers` objects.

> These follow the standard Web API [`Headers`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers) interface, exposing built-in methods for reading/updating headers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These follow the [standard Web API `Headers`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers) interface, exposing built-in methods for reading/updating headers.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";

export default createMiddleware({
      onRequest: (event) => {	
            // Reading client metadata for later use
            const userAgent = event.request.headers.get("user-agent");
            // Adding custom headers to request/response
		event.request.headers.set("x-custom-request-header", "hello");
		event.response.headers.set("x-custom-response-header1", "hello");
	},
	onBeforeResponse: (event) => {
		// Finalizing response headers before sending to client
		event.response.headers.set("x-custom-response-header2", "hello");
	},
});
```

```

Reviewer 2: This might need to be double checked for formatting - moving code blocks is a bit wonky within PR suggestions sometimes.

<Callout type="info" title="Note">

Headers set in `onRequest` are applied **before** the route handler processes the request, allowing downstream middleware or route handlers to override them.
Headers set in `onBeforeResponse` are applied **after** the route handler and are finalized for the client.

</Callout>

> ```ts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
> 
> export default createMiddleware({

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 	onRequest: (event) => {
> 		// Reading client metadata for later use
> 		const userAgent = event.request.headers.get("user-agent");
> 
> 		// Adding custom headers to request/response
> 		event.request.headers.set("x-custom-request-header", "hello");
> 		event.response.headers.set("x-custom-response-header1", "hello");
> 	},
> 	onBeforeResponse: (event) => {
> 		// Finalizing response headers before sending to client
> 		event.response.headers.set("x-custom-response-header2", "hello");
> 	},
> });
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Cookies

HTTP cookies are accessible through the `Cookie` request header and `Set-Cookie` response header.
While these headers can be manipulated directly, [Vinxi](https://vinxi.vercel.app), the underlying server toolkit powering SolidStart, provides helpers to simplify cookie management.
See the [Vinxi Cookies documentation](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/cookies.html) for more information.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
import { getCookie, setCookie } from "vinxi/http";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		// Reading a cookie
		const theme = getCookie(event.nativeEvent, "theme");

		// Setting a secure session cookie with expiration
		setCookie(event.nativeEvent, "session", "abc123", {
			httpOnly: true,
			secure: true,
			maxAge: 60 * 60 * 24, // 1 day
		});
	},
});
```

## Custom responses

Returning a value from a middleware function immediately terminates the request processing pipeline and sends the returned value as the response to the client.
This means no further middleware functions or route handlers will be executed.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: () => {
		return new Response("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
	},
});
```

This example returns a "401 Unauthorized" response with the text "Unauthorized" as the body, preventing further execution of middleware or route handlers.

```

<Callout type="info" title="Note">

Only [`Response`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) objects can be returned from middleware functions.
Returning any other value will result in an error.

</Callout>

> ```ts
> import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
> 
> export default createMiddleware({
> 	onRequest: () => {
> 		return new Response("Unauthorized", { status: 401 });
> 	},
> });
> ```
> 
> This example returns a "401 Unauthorized" response with the text "Unauthorized" as the body, preventing further execution of middleware or route handlers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

const REDIRECT_MAP: Record<string, string> = {
	"/signup": "/auth/signup",
	"/login": "/auth/login",
};

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		const { pathname } = new URL(event.request.url);

		// Redirecting legacy routes permanently to new paths
		if (pathname in REDIRECT_MAP) {
			return redirect(REDIRECT_MAP[pathname], 301);
		}
	},
});
```

This example checks the requested path and returns a redirect response if it matches a predefined path.
The 301 status code indicates a permanent redirect.
Other redirect status codes (e.g., 302, 307) are available as needed.

### JSON responses

Solid Router provides the [`json`](/solid-router/reference/response-helpers/json) helper function which simplifies sending custom JSON responses.

```ts
import { createMiddleware } from "@solidjs/start/middleware";
import { json } from "@solidjs/router";

export default createMiddleware({
	onRequest: (event) => {
		// Rejecting unauthorized API requests with a JSON error
		const authHeader = event.request.headers.get("Authorization");
		if (!authHeader) {
			return json({ error: "Unauthorized" }, { status: 401 });
		}
	},
});
```

## Chaining middleware functions

> The `onRequest` and `onBeforeResponse` options in `createMiddleware` can accept either a single function or an array of middleware functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`onRequest` and `onBeforeResponse` options in `createMiddleware` can accept either a single function or an array of middleware functions.
```
